src/blog-posts/bloom-filter.md, before:

---
title: Bloom Filters - A Smarter Way to Check If "We've Seen This Before"
date: 2025-07-10
slug: bloom-filter
image: /blog/bloom-filter/bloom-filter.png
author: Jinita Patel
excerpt: A fast, memory efficient guide to Bloom Filters. How they help at scale, their limitations, and why Ribbon Filters are a powerful alternative.
---

When you build systems like signups or search engines, one common question keeps popping up:

> **"Have we seen this before?"**

This is key for:

- Checking if an email or username is already registered
- Avoiding duplicate URLs in a crawler
- Speeding up cache checks

Let’s start by looking at how we’d solve this problem traditionally — and why that doesn’t scale.

![Thinking Boy](/blog/bloom-filter/thinking-boy.png)

## The Conventional Approach

When you want to check if an email, username, or URL already exists, the first approach is often a **hash table**.

### Example

- Store each item in a **HashSet** or **Map**
- On insert or lookup, hash the item and check if it's present

This works fine at a small scale. But as data grows into millions or billions, challenges appear.

### Common Strategies

**Hash Tables:**

- Fast lookup (`O(1)`)
- Problem: High memory usage; every key must be stored fully

**Sharding:**

- Distribute data across multiple servers
- Problem: Introduces network latency and coordination overhead

**Caching:**

- Use Redis or Memcached for hot keys
- Problem:Limited memory; cache evictions make lookups unreliable

### Core Issue

All these methods **store full keys**, making them **memory and latency-expensive** at scale.

## Why Use Bloom Filters?

A **Bloom Filter** is a space-efficient, probabilistic data structure that answers:

**This item is definitely not in the set**  
> OR  
> **It might be in the set**

The keyword here is: **“might”**.

## Simple Analogy: The Stamp Card

Imagine a bakery giving stamp cards.

A customer visits → you stamp spots based on their name  
They return → you check if those stamps exist

If none match → they’re **definitely new**  
If some match → they **might have visited before**

That’s how Bloom Filters behave.

## How Bloom Filters Work

A Bloom Filter consists of:

- A **bit array** of size `m`, initialized to 0  
- `k` independent **hash functions**

### To add an item

1. Hash the item with `k` functions  
2. Get `k` positions in the bit array  
3. Set all those bits to `1`

### To check an item

1. Hash again with the same `k` functions  
2. If **any bit is 0** → item is **definitely not** in the set  
3. If **all bits are 1** → item **might be** in the set

![Bloom Filter](/blog/bloom-filter/bloom-filter.png)

## Benefits of Bloom Filters

- **Memory efficient** (no full keys stored)  
- **Fast lookups** (bitwise operations)  
- **No false negatives** (if it says “not present,” it’s accurate)  

## Real-World Use Cases

- Signup systems (check if username/email is taken)  
- Web crawling (avoid revisiting URLs)  
- Databases (Bigtable, HBase skip disk I/O)  
- CDNs (check key presence)  

## False Positives vs False Negatives

| Type            | Can Happen? | Explanation                                  |
|-----------------|-------------|----------------------------------------------|
| False Positive  |  Yes       | May say item exists when it doesn’t          |
| False Negative  |  No        | Never misses an item that was actually added |

### False Positive Scenario

![False Positive](/blog/bloom-filter/false-positive.png)

## Limitations of Bloom Filters

| Limitation           | Why It Happens                                               |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| No Deletion          | Can’t undo which item set the bit; removing breaks integrity |
| No Retrieval         | Only stores presence indicators, not data                    |
| False Positives      | Bit collisions grow as more items are added                  |

## Deleting from a Bloom Filter? Use Counting Bloom Filters

**How it works:**

- Replace bit array with a **counter array**  
- On insert → increment counters  
- On delete → decrement counters

**Downsides:**

- More memory  
- Still allows false positives

## What Are Ribbon Filters?

**Ribbon Filters**, developed by Meta, are a more modern alternative to Bloom Filters.

They use **structured hashing** to improve accuracy and reduce memory further — especially for **static data sets**.

### Advantages of Ribbon Filters

- More **compact** than Bloom  
- Lower **false positive rate**  
- Tailored for **static sets** like search indexes or key maps  
- Efficient with **billions of entries**

## Comparison Table

| Feature                  | Bloom Filter      | Counting Bloom     | Ribbon Filter        |
|--------------------------|-------------------|---------------------|-----------------------|
| Memory Efficient         |  Yes            |  Medium           |  Very               |
| False Positives Possible |  Yes            |  Yes              |  Less frequent      |
| False Negatives          |  Never          |  Never            |  Never              |
| Supports Deletion        |  No             |  Yes              |  No (static only)   |
| Stores Items             |  No             |  No               |  No                 |
| Performance at Scale     |  Great          |  Okay             |  Excellent          |

## Final Takeaway

When systems need to answer **“Have we seen this before?”** at massive scale, storing every item isn’t practical. Bloom Filters offer a fast, memory-efficient way to approximate set membership.

They’re not perfect — they can't delete or retrieve — but they’re powerful for “is-it-there?” questions in real-time systems.

**Use:**

- **Bloom Filter** → for fast, low-memory lookups  
- **Counting Bloom** → when deletion is necessary  
- **Ribbon Filter** → for compact, static, high-scale filtering

Commit message:

Added explaination for false postive

src/blog-posts/bloom-filter.md, after:

---
title: Bloom Filters - A Smarter Way to Check If "We've Seen This Before"
date: 2025-07-10
slug: bloom-filter
image: /blog/bloom-filter/bloom-filter.png
author: Jinita Patel
excerpt: A fast, memory efficient guide to Bloom Filters. How they help at scale, their limitations, and why Ribbon Filters are a powerful alternative.
---

When you build systems like signups or search engines, one common question keeps popping up:

> **"Have we seen this before?"**

This is key for:

- Checking if an email or username is already registered
- Avoiding duplicate URLs in a crawler
- Speeding up cache checks

Let’s start by looking at how we’d solve this problem traditionally — and why that doesn’t scale.

![Thinking Boy](/blog/bloom-filter/thinking-boy.png)

## The Conventional Approach

When you want to check if an email, username, or URL already exists, the first approach is often a **hash table**.

### Example

- Store each item in a **HashSet** or **Map**
- On insert or lookup, hash the item and check if it's present

This works fine at a small scale. But as data grows into millions or billions, challenges appear.

### Common Strategies

**Hash Tables:**

- Fast lookup (`O(1)`)
- Problem: High memory usage; every key must be stored fully

**Sharding:**

- Distribute data across multiple servers
- Problem: Introduces network latency and coordination overhead

**Caching:**

- Use Redis or Memcached for hot keys
- Problem:Limited memory; cache evictions make lookups unreliable

### Core Issue

All these methods **store full keys**, making them **memory and latency-expensive** at scale.

## Why Use Bloom Filters?

A **Bloom Filter** is a space-efficient, probabilistic data structure that answers:

**This item is definitely not in the set**  
> OR  
> **It might be in the set**

The keyword here is: **“might”**.

## Simple Analogy: The Stamp Card

Imagine a bakery giving stamp cards.

A customer visits → you stamp spots based on their name  
They return → you check if those stamps exist

If none match → they’re **definitely new**  
If some match → they **might have visited before**

That’s how Bloom Filters behave.

## How Bloom Filters Work

A Bloom Filter consists of:

- A **bit array** of size `m`, initialized to 0  
- `k` independent **hash functions**

### To add an item

1. Hash the item with `k` functions  
2. Get `k` positions in the bit array  
3. Set all those bits to `1`

### To check an item

1. Hash again with the same `k` functions  
2. If **any bit is 0** → item is **definitely not** in the set  
3. If **all bits are 1** → item **might be** in the set

![Bloom Filter](/blog/bloom-filter/bloom-filter.png)

## Benefits of Bloom Filters

- **Memory efficient** (no full keys stored)  
- **Fast lookups** (bitwise operations)  
- **No false negatives** (if it says “not present,” it’s accurate)  

## Real-World Use Cases

- Signup systems (check if username/email is taken)  
- Web crawling (avoid revisiting URLs)  
- Databases (Bigtable, HBase skip disk I/O)  
- CDNs (check key presence)  

## False Positives vs False Negatives

| Type            | Can Happen? | Explanation                                  |
|-----------------|-------------|----------------------------------------------|
| False Positive  |  Yes       | May say item exists when it doesn’t          |
| False Negative  |  No        | Never misses an item that was actually added |

### Understanding False Positives in Bloom Filters

![False Positive](/blog/bloom-filter/false-positive.png)

The diagram above demonstrates how Bloom Filters handle lookups and how false positives can occur:

- The keys `foo`, `bar`, and `apple` are added to the set.
- Each key is hashed using three different hash functions, and the corresponding bit positions are set to `1` in the bit array.
- When we check for the key `cat`, one of its hashed positions points to a `0`, so we know for sure that `cat` was **never added** — a definite **"not present"**.
- However, the key `kite` hashes to three positions that are **already marked as `1`** by other keys.
- Since all its bits are `1`, the Bloom Filter returns **true**, even though `kite` was **never added**.

This is a **false positive** — the filter incorrectly thinks `kite` exists.

Bloom Filters are designed this way:  
they **never miss an inserted item**, but they **may mistakenly say something exists** due to overlapping bits.

## Limitations of Bloom Filters

| Limitation           | Why It Happens                                               |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| No Deletion          | Can’t undo which item set the bit; removing breaks integrity |
| No Retrieval         | Only stores presence indicators, not data                    |
| False Positives      | Bit collisions grow as more items are added                  |

## Deleting from a Bloom Filter? Use Counting Bloom Filters

**How it works:**

- Replace bit array with a **counter array**  
- On insert → increment counters  
- On delete → decrement counters

**Downsides:**

- More memory  
- Still allows false positives

## What Are Ribbon Filters?

**Ribbon Filters**, developed by Meta, are a more modern alternative to Bloom Filters.

They use **structured hashing** to improve accuracy and reduce memory further — especially for **static data sets**.

### Advantages of Ribbon Filters

- More **compact** than Bloom  
- Lower **false positive rate**  
- Tailored for **static sets** like search indexes or key maps  
- Efficient with **billions of entries**

## Comparison Table

| Feature                  | Bloom Filter      | Counting Bloom     | Ribbon Filter        |
|--------------------------|-------------------|---------------------|-----------------------|
| Memory Efficient         |  Yes            |  Medium           |  Very               |
| False Positives Possible |  Yes            |  Yes              |  Less frequent      |
| False Negatives          |  Never          |  Never            |  Never              |
| Supports Deletion        |  No             |  Yes              |  No (static only)   |
| Stores Items             |  No             |  No               |  No                 |
| Performance at Scale     |  Great          |  Okay             |  Excellent          |

## Final Takeaway

When systems need to answer **“Have we seen this before?”** at massive scale, storing every item isn’t practical. Bloom Filters offer a fast, memory-efficient way to approximate set membership.

They’re not perfect — they can't delete or retrieve — but they’re powerful for “is-it-there?” questions in real-time systems.

**Use:**

- **Bloom Filter** → for fast, low-memory lookups  
- **Counting Bloom** → when deletion is necessary  
- **Ribbon Filter** → for compact, static, high-scale filtering
